What's new in Pacer 1.0
===

We're very excited about the latest version of Pacer. We've used Pacer
0.9 for almost a year now and it's served us very well, but in that time
we found a few pieces that we weren't happy with in addition to the
improvments we've been able to make in architecture, consistency and
performance. So here's what's new in Pacer 1.0:

* The already quite comprehensive spec suite has been improved and also
  runs almost 10x faster.
* Graphs and elements are always wrapped. Previously, Pacer
  patched the raw Java classes to add the methods it needs in addition
  to allowing elements to be wrapped. By choosing to always use
  wrapping, we can provide a cleaner, easier and more consistent
  interface.
* It uses the current Tinkerpop 2.1 stack with the most current versions
  of Neo4j, Dex, OrientDB and TinkerGraph. This is great news because
  the Tinkerpop stack and the graphs that it supports are constantly
  improving. Pacer is back on the leading edge.
* Thanks to Pacer's improved architecure, all graph DBs supported by
  Tinkerpop just work Pacer. The pacer-[graphdb] gems are all updated
  but are now just a convenient way to get the dependencies.
* Pacer can fully support all of Blueprints' WrapperGraph implementations.
  If you need the functionality behind one of the wrappers or want to
  create your own, simply initialize a new PacerGraph with the wrapped
  graph.
* Pacer is now able to fully support all Gremlin pipes including those
  that require PipeFunctions, making all features in Gremlin available
  to Pacer in addition to Pacer's own unique features.
* Many internal details of the implementation have been improved to make
  Pacer's source much easier to understand and extend and provide a
  solid base on which to develop sophisticated prajects.


Breaking changes and upgrade notes
---

Breaking changes have been kept to a minimum but there were a number of
places that I was not happy with the previous implementation and I have
addressed them.

* It requires JRuby 1.7. This latest version of JRuby handles Java
  exceptions significantly more cleanly which eliminated a problem that I
  previously had to work around in numerous places. In addition it is
  now in 1.9 mode by default, starts up faster and conforms to the more
  recent Ruby 1.9.3 which brings valuable improvements to the standard
  Ruby libraries.
* To find an index, the `#index_name` method has been renamed to `#index`
* All `#element_type` methods now return simply :vertex, :edge, :mixed
  or :object.
* #extensions sometimes returned a Set and sometimes an Array. Now it
  always returns an Array.
* Elements yielded to a block within a route no longer have the
  BlockFilterElement extension added to them. In the rare occasion that
  you need to use the `#back` or `#vars` methods within a block, they
  can be easily accessed by referring to the route itself within the
  block. To see an example, refer to the as_spec.rb file.

